Appreciate your time this afternoon.
We have half an hour sit down,
welcome some introductory comments
and you know, questions from members of the committee.
Brilliant. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I would like to say some introductory comments, just,
um, to recognize the hard worker customs.
Very happy to discuss customs work and protect new and,
and protecting New Zealand and to support the efficient
and safe flow of trade and travelers.
Um, but a few comments that I'd like to specifically bring
to your attention targeting transnational organized crime
remains a top priority for me, both as minister of customs
and as associate minister of Police.
Unfortunately, as you'll be aware, this is an area
of growing concern, but customs and its network of domestic
and international partner agencies,
especially New Zealand police are doing a great job.
As one example, earlier this year in March, 2024, customs
and Police helped United States law enforcement prevent
almost 200 kilograms
of methamphetamine arriving in New Zealand and Australia.
This helped dismantle a US based criminal network.
So far this year, customs overseas liaison
and partner networks have stopped more than two tons
of drugs before it reached our border.
In addition, supported through intelligence
and targeting customs,
frontline offices seized more than three tons
of illegal drugs at our border.
Customs overseas liaison offices across the Pacific Asia
and the Atlantic play a valuable
and strategic role in this collaborative work.
These offices are also key support
for New Zealand's trade interests.
As an example of that support, a few months ago in July,
customs liaison officer in Beijing helped address delays in
to 8.5 million worth of exports held up at Tja,
um, port, which included time critical perishable goods.
This is a very small part of the trade customs facilitates,
and of course it also collects significant revenue,
17.4 billion last year.
To conclude, I would really sincerely want
to acknowledge custom staff and its leadership.
The organization has a strong reputation both in New Zealand
and overseas as a highly professional agency that operates
with integrity, agility, and diligence every day.
Customs do a critical work, custom staff do critical work,
and they do it to a very high standard,
and I thank them for that.
And with that, I'm happy to take questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much honor.
Thank you, minister. It's good to see you.
And, um, like you, I'd like to commend customs
and all of it staff members
because you're right, they do do a really brilliant job
of protecting, um, our board.
My question is about revenue though, um, minister,
because as you know, customs is the organization
that collects, I think,
the most revenue, um, for the country.
So we've had a revenue decline
of 1.2 billion this year collected by customs compared
to the last fiscal year.
And I just wanted to know what specific factors contributed
to the 6% decrease in the Crown revenue collected
by customs in 20 23, 24 compared
to the previous financial year, especially in light of, I
I remember one of, um, the stated goals
that you had from a previous session was
that you wanted revenue growth, um, through increased trade.
Yeah. And that, that is a, a big component.
We have a clear, I mean, the two priorities I set
for customers was to support the government's priority
of doubling our exports over the next 10 years.
And then the other component is
around the organized crime statistics.
So revenue growth is important,
but of course, revenue growth is impacted by our economy
and, and the, the state of our trading.
But in terms of specific
and around areas where we've seen that, um, reduction,
I think of turn to the comptroller
and any specific information.
So, uh, it's, it's fairly straightforward.
There have been fewer imports, export,
and we collect on those.
And when those are down,
there is less revenue for the Crown.
And we are the second largest collector of revenue
after in the revenue.
I do want to know, though, just through the details.
So was it in general
because of, of reduced, uh, trade global economic conditions
or domestic policy changes?
What areas, um, specifically did you see this reduction?
It's pretty much across the board, so I wouldn't say it,
you know, the, the New Zealand economy has
been in recession.
I think that's pretty, pretty well understood.
Uh, we have been, I importing this,
we've been exporting this.
If I can ask another, uh, specific question.
Was the 1.2 billion, uh,
revenue short form more pronounced in specific sectors
as you know, as you could see, was it fuel,
alcohol, tobacco?
What, what were those? Or was it just everything? It was
Less a higher value goods imported,
and it's a gst so it's a smaller take of gst,
But this was forecast by treasury,
so it is in my treasury forecast.
So do you have any, um,
any strategies for more efficient collection of revenue?
Would that actually assist in collecting more
of this revenue or No, only
because so few of this, these goods not coming through.
Yeah, I think, I think it is, um, genuinely around, um,
you know, definitely a reduction in the high value goods.
And I think that's across machinery
and equipment, big, big ticket items
that haven't been being bought in.
But the other component I think is recognizing
that there is a lot of work that customs has done to build
and developed, um,
the follow up round trade agreements that have been established.
So there has been significant work in that space, um,
to facilitate those trade agreements getting off the ground.
And I think that's one of the things I really wanted
to recognize around the stuff that's sort of unseen
by the public in terms of what customs does in terms
of facilitating and operationalizing those
agreements as they come through.
So I'll ask a different question.
How does New Zealand's decline in customs revenue compared
to other regions or other global countries?
Or are we unique in this decline
or do we actually compare to other OECD countries?
Is every other country declining in terms
of the revenue that they're collecting? Do
You? To be honest, I haven't
looked at that.
We, we worry very much about what we are collecting
and we, uh, treasury forecast is
what we judge ourselves against.
But I imagine if you look around the world,
it'll be a mixed picture
and, uh, some economies in a number
of economies globally have had, um, slow code, not, not
so much the US probably,
but if it helps China, it's a much slower economy.
Perhaps if I could add state
that commentary on Could you Yeah, sorry.
Just come forward to so
that we can hear it through microphones.
Um, treasury would consider the impact of changes to our
p volumes and values, um, in comparison
with other countries, and that would include
that commentary when they do the, uh, economic forecast.
So it's a, it's an answer, a, a question
that could be answered by treasury officials.
Um, we would provide advice to them on what we are seeing.
We are seeing, as we have said, uh, changes
and the volumes of, um, high value imports
and that's impacting our GST tank.
But treasury would do the analysis
of whether there are broader economic factors,
including whether other countries slowdowns
or import changes are, uh, different to what we are seeing.
Supplementary question. Francisco Hernandez.
Uh, thank you minister. Thank you chair.
Um, it's interesting that there's been, uh,
while there's been a decline in the sort of trade volumes,
um, according to annual report, there's been, uh,
a big increase in the, uh, air travel
and passenger cruise numbers coming to New Zealand.
Um, how do you explain that sort of countercyclical thing
in terms of the opposite movement?
Is it just because the borders have opened again? Like
Basically, but actually, uh,
air travel still hasn't fully recovered
Right. From the pre pandemic levels.
So we still running around 93% of the 2019 figures.
Uh, cruise volumes came back strongly last year,
but we're seeing lower of volumes this year
and we are expecting to see lower
of volumes again next year.
Yeah. And Connor,
Thank you very much.
Um, does the decline in revenue,
and I guess the squeeze on the budget, um,
affect your ability to, um, identify,
uh, track and seize, uh, illicit high value goods like drugs
In terms of the ability to operationally respond?
Yeah. I mean, and I congratulate you for,
for capturing three tons.
Yeah. How many tons do you estimate does indeed come
across the border illegally?
Well, we do, we have the water testing results, which you,
you'll be aware of, um,
which we are seeing an increase in volume.
We are still seizing more than is being used.
Um, so we have seen the increase,
but you know, from, from what we can see,
there is an increasing volume, um, of wastewater results.
We haven't kind of got a handle on that in terms terms
of our capacity to continue to police the operational side
of the, um, the activity of customs isn't impacted
by the revenue it's collecting.
Can I just come the estimate of the volume of drugs
consumed within the country?
Yeah. Because I guess there are a flow on effects to health
services, um, social consequences, et cetera.
What, what is the estimate if UFCs three tons is
that 3%, 10%?
It's incredibly difficult to know. Yeah.
So we are fortunate
to have wastewater statistics in this country.
Many of the jurisdictions we would compare
ourselves to do not.
So, you know, I continue that last month, uh, per week,
New Zealand just consumed 34 kilos of methamphetamine.
Um, like stats
for cocaine are about five kilos a week in end,
DMA about ecstasy, about the same.
But extrapolating from that as to
what went missing is a really difficult thing to do.
I, we certainly have see, um,
see 3.7 kilos, about 3.7 tons of drugs this year,
and overseas partners just over three tons of,
and that's highest ever with the one exception
of cocaine last year where we had a super bowl of three,
four tons through the, um, operational hydro.
The gangs manage the drug supply, they will stop pile,
they will release drugs into the community.
We're seeing a price drop in methamphetamine.
So whether that is contributing to the, um,
greater use probably is whether the gangs are trying
to move their patches, get a bit more of a market.
It's probably happening too,
but it is really difficult to
to know how much we we're missing.
I guess in my mind, we are seizing still far more than is
far, far more than is being used.
But of course we are missing some.
I think something else that's worth mentioning is seizures
now are often very large.
So if you look back 20 years, 20 years ago,
we seized one kilo
of methamphetamines in the whole year, one kilo.
Now I get stats every morning on my desk,
what we seized the day before.
And we, if we're not seizing between 10
and 20 kilos a day, I'm worried
that's how the market has changed.
And, uh, you may have seen in the media recently operation
what was nearly 500 kis of less in one shipment that we
discovered an excellent piece of customs for trade craft,
good cooperation lease.
But if you miss one 500 kilo shipment,
it's not like missing a 20 kilo shipment.
So we are working incredibly hard, keep up with this.
I'd also say this is a global trend.
Again, this is what we've see all around the world.
Supplementary, Laura,
Just, just tos on.
Thanks, Ms. Chair. Just tos onto that.
Um, given that the transnational organized crime is such a
big focus, I acknowledge it's not just your role,
it's other government agencies working together
and sometimes other countries working together.
So how has that changed since the last time we saw you?
Um, and is there a bit of an update into the progress on
how those relationships are
Going? I,
I think the, I mean, you know, there is, um,
ongoing activity we have, um, in, in terms
of additional investment and resource.
One of the, um, key initiatives is we've, um, um,
got cabinet approval
to establish a ministerial advisory group to really focus on
how all of the different agencies that contribute
to this solution can work better together, um,
share information better and respond more cohesively.
I think the customs and the police model has been a really
good example of how well this works.
And, and that's not saying there aren't other agencies
working in this space at the moment, um,
but it's just how we operationalize that and,
and do it better and understand more
how we can be more efficient.
So that's the first initiative. Mm-Hmm.
The other thing is around customs, um, looking
to expand its presence overseas.
Mm-Hmm. Um, and the customs does a lot of work
and, and engaging.
I I think we just, um,
finished a course working in the Solomon Islands, um,
training officer over there.
Um, had a huge role in through Chaum, um, working with Fiji
around the, um, ability to, you know, respond.
So we, we do reach out proactively and,
and, um, the comptroller
and her team work very proactively in that space
to build relationships.
And it is that knowing a person
has been really, really effective.
Great.
Francisco and Andy, thank you Chair.
Um, I'm really interested to kind of, uh,
explore your answer about the, the drugs.
Um, what's the most common entry point?
Is it passengers trying to smuggle it in?
Is it through the container ships?
What's, how, how's it getting in?
Well, I, I think I can respond. It's everywhere, right?
So we have, um, couriers a lot more frequently coming
through bringing, um, suitcases.
Yeah. Within that, that's, um, increased significantly.
We have a significant issue around trusted insiders,
so people working within ports, um, within airports
that are facilitating.
Um, we have mail, um, lots of mail interceptions,
which are constantly, which was one of the things
that surprised me is how much is posted, um,
how much is intercepted through that process.
Um, you couriers, um, and then large shipments,
and I think we announced recently there was a,
a significant, um, find that was, um,
in steel beams in a, in a container.
So the, their agility and their ability to respond.
Um, we have through the ports we have, um, um, sea chest
where they, they're attached
to ships without the ship even knowing it's there.
Just everything you can think
of if there's a way of getting into this country.
Unfortunately, the legitimate supply chains usually support,
um, the, you know, the ability to bring in, um, the,
the stuff that we don't want in this country.
So yeah, pretty much it, it's a very nimble, um,
agile environment and where there's a weak link,
they'll find a way through.
So that's, um, why the increased investment.
Just recently this year, um, customs set up a, a
investigative team in, um, Targa
because of the level of activity at Targa Port.
So these are the sort of initiatives where,
where there's a issue, they will respond
and work collectively to, um,
close the gap. And I've got up on
That. Is it just,
um, the drugs they're bringing in illegally
through his roots, or are they bringing in things like
firearms and other contraband as
Well? Less firearms.
There isn't.
So there is generally there's been seizures
where they have found drugs with firearms within it.
Um, but it's not, uh, to that level of volume.
Um, it's, um, not something that they're, um, seizing
as such, but drugs significantly
and a significant amount of tobacco.
Okay. Genius Lewis.
Um, how many transnational organized, um,
crime groups were disrupted in this
and dismantled in this, um, annual, um, fiscal year?
And are the prosecution rates aligned
with the seizure rates?
Um, I might get Jamie to ask excuse.
Thank you. Uh, I can't give you an honest answer about
how many, um, transnational organized crime groups have been
disrupted because we don't actually count that.
Um, but there are investigations under every day.
We are frequently making arrests supporting
police to make their arrests.
Those are transnational organized crime groups.
Um, so as the minister mentioned recently, the, um,
operation Good are the still beams that is, uh,
obviously linked to, um, criminal elements in South America,
the United States, uh,
and, uh, um, elements here
that is a transnational organized crime group.
So, uh, those arrests
and investigations go on every single day.
There are more importations than there are prosecutions.
'cause as we've mentioned before, the scale of, uh, of the,
of the drug importations into the country is, is huge.
And that is a worldwide trend,
and we focus our investigations
where we think we can have the most impact
on the organized crime groups.
So they're getting really sophisticated, um,
these organized crime groups.
How, and what strategies are you using to ensure
that you are either matching or outsmarting them?
I think that secrets the biggest strength we have is
with those international relationships
and the, the way in which we're gathering intelligence.
We're doing a lot more profiling and analysis, um, offshore.
So we're doing a lot more before people arrive.
That's why we're doing so much more interceptions
before they arrive here because of those relationships.
Our intelligence systems are, are really good,
but also looking at other technologies
and equipments that we can use to improve our detection.
Um, for example is, um, piece of work around the data
for mail around analyzing mail before it comes here.
So we've got more information about what to target.
Um, and the same thing with travel.
Um, looking at, um, profiling, people profiling, um, trade
to identify higher risk.
So all of that intelligence analysis stuff is probably the
biggest investment.
We, I just have one follow up question about the revenue,
um, question I asked before.
How does the government plan to address the implications
of the 1.2 billion shortfall in crown revenue?
And does this decrease jeopardize, um,
funding public service?
So the, and that's where I,
I would highlight the trade agreements
that have been developed
and are in tranche at the moment around making,
operationalizing those trade agreements.
And I think we've seen, um, a number of announcements
around those trade agreements in the work
that's been progressed in that space.
Um, more recently the a CN agreement, um, in terms
of the next stage of, um,
facilitating those trade opportunities.
So I think that's the, um, the biggest focus we have.
The other component is, um, the customs, um, looking
to appoint a liaison position in New Delhi
to build those relationships in India.
So though all of those sort of pieces of work is, um,
responding to, so when we have overseas postings,
it's not just about, um, the, um, enforcement side
of things, it's also to facilitate trade.
So there's been some proactive work in that space as well.
Thank you. Uh, just on the facilitating trade and,
and I know that the figure internationally is very low.
That is, uh,
paper-based transactions are still at the heart of most things.
What, what's the, um, situation regarding our systems
and then the interoperability with other systems and,
and what are the hurdles to kind of improving that?
I suppose it's single trade window,
Sorry. Uh, but,
you know, trade single window, we have a highly,
highly automated, uh, very, very good system.
We are fortunate and the community of my colleagues
who do not have such thing, for example, Australia doesn't,
uh, used by both customs posted by customs,
but also all EPI entries go through to, um,
I, I just, I just feel grateful every day
that we have it actually, because it enables us to do a lot
of what the minister is talking about.
It enables us to pre-assess, uh,
or imports, addiction exports, uh, well before they get here
and, um, make plans.
We think we're going to need to intervene.
Um, it's not the case around the world. You're quite right.
Uh, digital trade is not the norm.
Uh, it's improving every year.
What do we try, try to do a range of things.
Um, we are very active in the World Customs Organization,
which is a multilateral, uh, group thing
of customs administrations from 186 countries.
Uh, Richard has chaired the safe framework
for the WCA for the last two years.
And if that's about facilitating efficient and effective
and safe trade, so trying to help some
of the countries which are willing to digitize their trade.
Uh, we are very involved in the apex,
the subcommittee on customs procedures,
and a lot of that is about promoting digitized trade.
Uh, again, none of those economies, uh, very much wanting
to digitize, but having
to get themselves into the right place.
Uh, I signed a, brings, uh,
Singapore in the last few months, which again is looking
to facilitate efficient trade
and Singapore is highly digitized, so, um,
I'm interested in learning what we came from them.
I think our systems are very good.
The Singapore ian system reaches further into, uh,
shipping companies for example, than we do here.
It might might be a bit of a social license question about
that, but yeah, that's an interesting thing
that they're doing to get even more information
that they could assess before. Good to us.
And if I could give a little plug to optimize, you know,
automating things as the traveler declaration,
if you haven't got the app on your phone,
please ensure next time you air travel
that you do the online traveler declaration. Yes.
Yeah, I, I have very good actually. Great, thank you.
And the reduced cues that customers are fabulous. Thank you.
Is that providing direct benefit, do you think, in terms
of helping to identify potentially some of the risks around
Yeah, significantly.
Both from an NPI perspective
and, uh, a traveler perspective, it's really useful, um, to,
as we've said, that pre um, analysis
of who's coming into the country.
The, the earlier that we know that information,
the better we are at targeting.
So yeah, that, that, those are all those components
around getting a bit smarter around what, what we're doing
and being able to, um,
know information earlier is really useful.
And if I may say so, I think it's good for travelers
because it gives them a bit of an indication as to
what we're worried about
and interested in, uh, somewhat in our space.
So for example, if you're bringing more than 10,000 bucks
vacation to the country, that can, that's generally fine,
but we need to know.
And so this tells me you really have to do
that from an NPI perspective.
Uh, it gives, uh, Trevor an opportunity to understand that,
for example, we won't let partner into the country
so they can make a choice about whether they bring it
and try to get it through or they just don't break the,
which was fast form preference.
Can I just quickly supple on that? Yes.
Um, are those forms available in other languages? Yes.
Okay, good. Just 'cause I noticed that, you know,
when you come in, there's sometimes
people that are struggling to do
The paper forms. Yes.
We have a few languages, which the forms are in,
and they have, um, a set of other, quite, quite a number,
I think about 20 languages, which are not, forms,
not in those, but there are helpful instructions.
Okay.
Lisa, um, Melissa, can you just explain, um,
what internal risk assessments were conducted
regarding the teacher liabilities from elicit tobacco cases
and why these assessments failed to predict the 9.9 million,
um, liability that had to be paid?
Oh, so yeah, I think I might get the, um, comp controller so
that that is the, um,
The right, right off Off the debt. Yeah.
So, well, it's a smuggled commodity, uh,
and we don't know when we're going
to get smuggling occurring, uh, that the tobacco was seized.
Uh, and under our legislation, we actually have
to assess the smuggled goods for, um, revenue,
which I have to say feels a bit ridiculous to me
because there was no way the
smuggler are going to pay the revenue.
Yeah. Uh, and that happened very late in the financial year.
And, and so we had to assess the revenue $9 million.
Obviously we were never going to receive that on the path
of the crown, so we have to write that off.
And so that, that coming later, bless,
see blew up helpful debt provision.
We let, uh, we let those who need to know
about that as quickly as we could.
So that was flag before year end,
but we didn't have, we would have
to shift our delta debt provision in time.
So just in terms of the process, what specific steps, um,
were taken to secure the approval under, um, section 26 C
of the public refinery? All
Appropriate steps were taken in time.
Right. So at what point
or did you ask for advice from either t um,
or other organizations?
This was done entirely with treasuries. Okay.
Um, the treasury were totally informed
and totally around forward budget.
So are there any further steps that customs could take to
address and or avoid this
equation in the future? I feel there's
A very converse decision here, which is Yeah, don't seize,
Don't seize. See,
which is not what we, and,
and that, that was, I think from a process point of view,
I think it's probably about how we manage that seizure
o on the understanding because that,
that's what creates the issue.
Mm-Hmm. And the, the,
the seizure late in the year was the big issue.
So perhaps there's a process issue around
how we manage that.
Um, but at this point, this is the process that we're with
and they have to evaluate, um, what is, you know,
the, the revenue loss.
I, I actually think it's having to account
for the revenue Mm-Hmm.
Role. And that's something we will be talking
to minister about climate
Change. Because I understand
you annual report
that the person was prosecuted Yes.
As in prison Yes. But had no assets to pay. Absolutely.
That's right. So you, we did everything we possibly could,
but, and, and another person incentive is we can't exactly
go and sell tobacco to Cooper costs or, or the,
I think we would much rather that you seize the tobacco
perhaps a reporting issue on paper
than the other way around.
And obviously it's helpful knowing the potential value
of what's coming in, but yeah,
obviously there's an issue there.
Yeah. From that perspective. Uh, Dana
Cher, uh, well mine was actually gonna start
with the previous question, but Mike,
I I just wanna ask, I'll far it away anyway.
I'm just interested in the $10,000, um, amount.
Um, how long has it been $10,000? What a while actually.
And is that still a relevant number in this day and age?
I think so. In terms of cash, yes. Yeah. I think it
Remains ordering and we have to
for fulfill our international obligations
under million ordering.
So that's why we ask and look,
and the vast majority of cases,
if people tell us they have the money,
legitimately, it's fine.
Okay. And, and is there a large number
of people bringing in $10,000 worth of cash?
There are, might be surprised.
Don't move in the right circles. Wouldn't,
Wouldn't it be great? Okay.
When I last Some people bring in
Thank you. I mean, I'm,
um, we have
Changes customs legislation on a reasonably regular basis.
Why are the two anomalies
that have been identified here today?
Why haven't they been moved through some
basically legislation
Last we must, uh, legislation in 2018?
Uh, we don't, we don't want
to be bringing things back all the time.
So actually Richard is ling up the sorts of things
that we would like fixed
and we'll be back, I think coming, coming to a cabinet
and then into the house probably at some point next year.
And from a prioritization point of view, it's, you know,
from a, you know, yes there was a accounting issue,
but you know, it was easily explained.
It was all compliant with, um, the processes. So
I ask. Very good. Yeah.
Do we
have time for a quick question? Yep. Final
Question. Final question. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um, so my
final question would be at, um, the,
both the budget and I think the previous annual review we
discussed, um, some of the health and safety around, uh,
because of the increased, um, risk with some of the
seizures and things that you're doing.
Um, has there been any operational changes,
any additional training given?
And do you see there being another budget bid to increase
that part next time around
and without foresee the future too much,
just given the trends are going up?
Yeah. And there is a worry I guess on staff,
and I remember the comptroller really
highlighted that last one.
Yeah, yeah. From a personal perspective,
I think there is a real need, particularly the types
of searches and, you know Yeah.
The environments they're having to go into around the ships,
um, containers, what you're opening up
and the, the environment that they've got to work in.
So I think there's real, not, not suggesting
that there's not a huge amount of training and being done,
but I think the more nimble they are, um, then the,
the risk is, and then the other thing is the types of, um,
substances that can exposure Yeah.
Brought in is, is the other issue. Mm-Hmm.
So yeah, I would say there's a lot more the, the,
the key one where I see, um, some real issues is
around our drug storage and disposal processes.
Mm-Hmm. We are getting massive volumes
and the way in which we, um, deal with that, you know,
it's representing high risk.
So I think we've got to look at some stuff in that space
as well, and we're doing some work in that. Great.
Thanks. Right.
I just would add, we, we look at our equipment
and training all the time
and we've just agreed to spend about $300,000 on, um,
recutting out our maritime teams
because we've fallen behind.
And so we'll bring ourselves up to the same level
as the Navy and Australian Defense Force.
So, so you, those decisions that we take are very
staff who go out on either drug jobs
for child exploitation jobs now, not just,
but holistic, which is really unfortunate.
Uh, but also to be clear, the police are in, you know,
an absolutely dispensable part of, um,
our observations in those spaces.
So generally speaking special tactics go and first
because our staff are not armed.
That's correct. Yeah. Don't have the same level of,
Very good. Alright, thank
you very much
minister for time this afternoon.
It,
Would you like us to leave
and come back or do you want us to
You're welcome to stay right there.
Don't move immediately.
Go right into the hearing for the annual review for
New Zealand custom service for the 2324 year from, um,
welcome along comp controller officially
and your team as we work through this next session.
We have an hour set down for today's hearing.
Um, we welcome your introductory remarks on regard to, uh,
the overall position.
And then we will crack into it with questions from there.
We don't have a formal structured agenda, um,
but have, will it range across topics as necessary?
Yes. Get do
Further members of our leadership
Team? Oh, absolutely.
Thank you. Yep.
Bring them in it's public session. I can join us.
Some of my opening opening remarks are perhaps
redundant given the last half hour, but
If you prefer we can crack straight into questions.
No, I'll, I think at least I should
introduce my, my colleagues.
That would be great. So, uh, and
thank you very much for seeing us.
You've had a very long day in this room
and I do appreciate, um, that we are, we are last.
So, uh, thank you. Thank you for your energy and enthusiasm.
Uh, I'd like to introduce my colleagues, so Jamie Banford,
who is Deputy Chief Executive Operations.
Richard Barge, who's Deputy Chief Executive
Policy Legal and Strategy.
Cheryl May, deputy Chief Executive Enterprise Services,
Joe Hanon, chief Executive International Governance,
Greg Hanon, chief Financial Officer, and David.
So, uh, chief Legal Officer.
Um, I think we've talked quite a lot about our protection
role, so, uh, don't necessarily need to go through
that again, but I've actually got some statistics just
for this year, which, which are still very much on the same
trajectory as we've been talking about.
So, uh, from January to October we have seized two, two tons
of methamphetamine, uh, nearly 600 kilos of powdered MDMA
and over 400 kilograms of cocaine.
Um, sorry I missed that last one. I'm sorry.
400 kilos of cocaine. Uh, and they're overseas partners.
Uh, one point, uh, sorry, 1.9 tons of meth, uh, 200 kilos
of cocaine and 130 kilos.
VDA has stopped for us, uh,
although destined for New Zealand.
So this is very sad and obvious trend.
Um, and as you've heard,
the transnational organized crime groups are
continuing to be agile.
They are adaptive, they are sophisticated,
and they have a lot of money, which, uh, means that sort of,
um, smuggling means we are seeing, uh, extremely,
uh, capable, I guess, uh, it,
it is quite common now to see extremely expensive, uh,
large machinery imported, uh,
with very cunning concealments of drugs.
And the gangs are quite prepared
to spend the money on that machinery.
Do the concealment ship the drugs here?
Ironically, they do pay the import duties and then, um,
and then we seize them.
Um, we do work very closely, as the minister said,
with partner agencies in New Zealand
and overseas to provide our resources to target
and disrupt these supply chains,
the criminals and their profits.
Uh, and we take a similarly collaborative approach in terms
of illicit tobacco sniping and child exploitative material.
We've talked about trade this year,
so I probably don't need to cover that.
Um, but I think it is worth nevertheless mentioning
that compliant trade continues to be highly efficient
with over 98% of compliant trade items cleared
through the digital system within five minutes of lodgement.
Uh, as I mentioned there,
travel numbers have not quite recovered to pre covid levels,
but we did process, uh, around 13 million arriving
and partying year passengers last year.
We have actually expanded our eGate availability, uh,
and we now have access
to all European Union countries in addition
to the countries we, uh, which brings us up to 34 countries
and we will be up to about 57
in the first half of next year.
We've also opened the gates to 10 year olds
and above, which enables more family groups
to use the smart gates, uh,
museum travel declaration has been referred to.
We're seeing that as very stable and successful.
Uh, however, I would like
to see more air travelers using the digital option.
We're running at about 57% of travelers.
Um, and that's not, not enough. I wanted to drive that up.
Uh, but actually cruise passengers, we're seeing
virtually all cruise ships, well over 90% of passengers
and using travel, which is great.
So I would just really like to close
by acknowledging the skill, dedication,
hardworking professionals,
and that my staff demonstrate every day and grateful.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much. Alright, questions
for the controller and customs team?
Francisco Hernandez. Thank
You Chair. Um,
yeah, really acknowledging that kind of dedication
and hard work of your, your staff.
Uh, are you concerned that there's been a 26% increase in,
uh, EAP consultations from, um,
November, 2023 to 2024 compared to November 22
to November 23 mm-Hmm.
And what's driving that?
Uh, so yes, I am concerned that, you know, it's not a,
not a statistic that you want to see going up,
but on the other hand, I think staff do feel very, um, able
to access the a p, which is a good thing.
The majority of reasons that staff do access EAP sort
of well over 70% and the 80% are actually not work related.
They family personal, um, people who might have a bit
of a gambling, uh, but we receive anonymized data.
So I don't know precisely who is going to access this,
the active services.
Uh, I think it's been a tough year for,
for many New Zealanders.
Um, you know, we ourselves have restructured
and some people have left.
Uh, and that is, that is stressful
and I think we do see, we get a broad report on the reasons
that people access the a p
and restructuring has been noted as one of those.
But I think, um, so I think it's a good service.
I'm glad people are accessing it.
Honorable genius. Lisa,
Um, can you just tell us what the, um, baseline FDE count
custom staff, uh, this, um, fiscal year
and how was that baseline FTE determined please?
Right, well if I look at my annual report on page 68,
you can see that head count is was for that
for the last financial year was sitting at 1,355.
And our full-time equivalents at 1319.3.
So basically head count is the number of people we have
a as at 30 June
and the full-time equivalents represent just there.
So of the 1 3 5 5, some people will be working part-time.
So that brings it back down to full-time equivalence,
which is another.
So that whole total number of FTE baseline
that includes part-time contractors as
Well as not contractors, Just not
contractors, just includes part-time.
Just, just, so how does this, um,
baseline FTE this fiscal year compare to the previous,
um, fiscal year, please?
Well, if, if you have the annual report there,
you can see, uh, that the numbers were,
well actually we're probably pretty much
where we were at 20 19, 20.
Uh, we had quite an increase through the Covid period
because we took on more time border order work,
um, as you may recall.
And we had a temporary spike in our workforce,
which was reflected there,
but we we're sitting pretty back where we were.
One final, um, follow up question.
Um, what is the FDE allocation
to frontline versus support and managerial?
Uh, so we don't tend to use to frontline, um, it's not,
not something the way we think about our staff,
but in, uh, Jamie's area, Jamie's got about
Just over a thousand.
Yep. Sorry, just over a thousand within, uh,
operations. That's right.
Okay. Thank you.
Right. Next question. Well,
I'm interested in the travel declaration.
Perhaps if you can expand a bit on that.
Obviously it's, uh,
come into effect over the last couple of years.
You've got 57%, I think it was usage across the board,
obviously much higher on cruise ships.
It's good. Um, is, is that trend improving
or is it starting to plateau?
Uh, are there particular regions
where we're seeing visitors traveling from
where it's getting better uptake? Yeah,
Uh, we, we've got loads of stats
'cause I'm, I'm an endless pain in the about this as,
as my colleagues will tell you.
Um, so I think we, we had an initial flurry,
we probably got up to about 30, 35%
and then it's stubbornly Plato.
So we've been pushing really hard to get up to the sort
of high 50%.
If I go back in time, we've had a,
we think we've had a manual arrival card since about 1921.
And it turns out that even though people complain about it
endlessly and say the squeeze too small fit your name in,
I can't find the pen and all of these things, uh,
getting them off the manual card has proven quite,
quite difficult also.
And you travel, uh,
actually the airlines have been very committed
to handing out paper cards
and you know, I talk to them all regularly,
but I'm sure you've had the experiences I have
where you're sitting there and someone comes down the
plane and hands your card.
And what we've actually found is even people who've done the
digital arrival card sort of feel they have
to fill out the manual card.
Um, you know, they don't want to do the wrong thing.
They're trying, trying to be very compliant.
So changing that behavior is pretty difficult.
Um, if we can get New Zealanders
and Australians to change their behavior,
that will make a big difference
because they have majority ERs here.
And the Australians have just in last couple of months,
started a very small pilot with a digital sort
of digital card thing.
I thought this is very superior, but you probably say that.
Uh, but I think, you know, if you've got
a digital arrival card expectation on both sides
of the Tasman, that will, that will help over
time drive numbers up.
We've just started a big campaign for the Christmas period
and, um, to start next year.
'cause so many people traveling.
So, um, you'll see that a little bit around, um, airlines.
So in New Zealand, Qantas
and Jetstar have been very helpful.
They now have got, if you,
if you look at your in New Zealand app, you'll see
that N CTDs there.
So that's helpful.
And they do do push notifications
to passengers who are traveling.
Um, I must say as someone who travels, I don't tend
to read my push notifications, so I'm not sure
how successful that'll be.
But, but they're trying to help, um, uh,
announcements on planes have changed.
They're much more prescriptive,
you must do a digital arrival card.
So I think we've seen a bit of it, a bit
of a lift because of that.
Uh, actually NPI has been very helpful.
They do quite a lot of promotion in overseas airports about
what not to bring to New Zealand, which will fall,
fall far about biosecurity settings.
And, uh, they generously
and giving us some of their, um, advertising space to put,
people remind us to travelers, you know, if you're coming
to New Zealand, this is what you need to do.
I've seen some great photos,
these big billboards in up here saying if you're traveling
to New Zealand NTD.
So we are kind
of trying everything we can possibly think of.
Um, it, it, next year
I would like to turn the eGates off for those
who have not done digital arrival card, but at the moment,
unless we get the take up, up, I'm too, I'm nervous
that there'll be acceptable levels
of passenger congestion and curing.
So
Listen. Um,
so have you got any plan to upgrades then
for the declaration in terms of expanding functionality?
Uh, actually what we've done is just very quietly,
and if you've used it from the very beginning, it's, it's,
it's, um, look, it's been a good product from the start,
but it's got that, you know, refinements,
which we've just quietly put in over time.
So for example, if you travel than once,
your biographic details will come up for you,
which is not something we had in, if you're doing a set
of family declarations that's now available to you.
So those things we just constantly trying
to put and half things through.
Yeah. Can you fill it out offline?
Yes. Then uploaded? Yes.
If you've uploaded the app, you can fill it
and off, uh, you can complete it offline
and then have it upload.
Actually that's another slight issue we've got.
Um, uh, wifi on planes
is not necessarily quite good enough,
so I think people also get caught by that.
Yeah, and I have, I, I always try it myself if I'm flying.
Um, I've, I've always completed my form, I assure you.
But I will try to see, and uh, I won't name the airlines,
but in my discussions
with various airline chief executives say, will admit
the wifi is not really sufficient often.
Mm. I think that will improve over time. Yeah.
Damien, uh, look, thank you.
And I, I I don't know what the, um, the profile of
visitors coming into the country, people moving in and out,
but I suggest it's probably towards the
older end of the spectrum.
And I mean, I, to to hear you say that, you know, you'd like
to turn it off next year, I, I think is completely
unrealistic, crazy, um, you know, given
that the, the issues that you're raising.
So while I, uh, admire the aspirations, if you like, um,
you know, given that international trade, most
of the still paper based, I think, you know,
you shouldn't have plan B
otherwise we could be in a real model
for people coming into country. We,
I'll be cautious. IIII
don't need much grief potentially, but,
but it is, you know, and you all know this, it's,
if you go now to Japan, if you go to China, if you go
to Singapore, it's increasingly a requirement.
So again, I think the world will become more used to it.
Interestingly, I thought it would be older people who
were resistant or just wouldn't adopt it.
It's actually, they've been really good.
It's, the young ones are not so good. Oh, right. I
Don't expect that they would line with the common ground
Cruise ships perhaps. Was it? Sorry.
They would line with the comment on cruise ships,
Possibly more experienced.
I think the younger people don't tend to get quite
as organized when someone comes down and plane hand fill out
and just go, oh yeah, fill it out.
It's, I'm generalizing terribly.
I think the last time I came back in, I used paper,
you know, the time before I'd done digital.
It's kind of a, it's a bit of a model.
Is the 24 hour limit for a flight an issue
because people are traveling often it's, you know, too hard
to do it in transit or that's, yeah.
You know, people just like to get organized early.
It's a very interesting question
and uh, one of the reasons we have
that is actually particularly for our colleagues in NPI,
because, um, from a customs perspective, I,
I wouldn't really mind if you fill it out well ahead
and look, to be honest, I tend
to fill my mine out quite early and we never unfriendly.
Oh, and just
'cause the paper ones you can, right.
So what's the difference? Well, you
No, but if, if you've visited, you have to be. Yeah. But
You can do that on the Paper one,
You can do that on the paper one right now. Yeah.
But you're not submitting it,
But be before.
So with the EPI would prefer people to want people
to be thinking actively about
what they're putting in their bag
or what they might have in their bag.
And, you know, if you fill your form out three or four
or five days or 10 days ahead of time, you may not
think about the fact that you've decided to bring some,
some apples back or something.
Or you might have, you might have taken
sandwich for your child in bed.
That's true. So, yeah.
So look, it's a, it's a, it's a balance between facilitating
compliant passengers but also managing the risks.
The cocaine might slip through but not be,
And yep.
On that then what are, what are Japan and things doing?
I'm pretty sure theirs is about five
days sinking from when I
Went there. Well, they, they
had quite different
biosecurity settings for us.
We, we are just,
We Right. Quite strict. Yeah.
Right.
And, and also good reason, you know, we need to
Yes. Yeah, no, absolutely.
To protect our production. Tim Costley.
Thank you. Um, look just on some
of the operational highlights from the year,
and I read some examples in your annual report, um,
certainly shows trend of, uh, seizures from North America.
I think tracking up methamphetamines quite high.
I was reading, uh, the other day about operation end game,
which I think was, I did have the number written down, two
and a half tons of methamphetamine.
But there are, uh, a number of other sort
of highlights, some cocaine.
Um, I guess it's really hard to say if that's a sign
that you're, you're doing a great job,
you're intercepting more
or if it's a sign of what's happening,
you might have some anecdotal comparisons from other
countries in the world in terms of whether it's going,
but how do you sort of assess that aspect of your operations
for the, for the year?
Well, it's a bit of what we were talking about earlier
with, you know, how much, how much are we missing?
Yeah. Um, I mentioned
that this is what we're seeing globally.
So talking to the head of the UK border force very recently,
uh, they seized 30 tons of cocaine last year.
They are on track to seize 50 tons this year.
So, you know, if you think about
proportionately, I think we're
Well Ahead. Well
probably, you know, we're globally just drugs are,
um, I talked to my Belgium colleague, you know, Belgium
of course has Intuit port
and our Dutch colleagues Rotterdam port.
The amount of cocaine that is going
through those ports is just truly, almost unimaginable.
Um, the cocoa crop has been good.
Uh, there's a lot of money to be made
and the gangs will pursue the money.
So I think it's,
it's really just really hard to tell.
We, we work very hard to try
and seize as much as we possibly can.
What, what do you read into the trend up that the sign,
what looks to me in your, in your report,
like a significant trend up in methamphetamine
and in North America and are the, are the two related
or is that just the way that um, that part of,
Well, New Zealand is sort of ence for methamphetamine,
you know, ahead of almost any other country in the world.
So Australia, uh, we pay a very high price for it.
Australia does and Japan to an extent, but we are really,
and that's, that is different from the other countries we
might, um, look to.
So you, I just mentioned the UK cocaine is, it's, um,
meth is not, so it's hardly a problem.
Relatively speaking. Cocaine is what they, they prefer.
Uh, but we, we have always been a meth country.
Um, I dunno if you want to sort of
Say more, well, I'd just say, uh,
as a controller says methamphetamine
and look at the wholesale price methamphetamine in the
United States for a kilo sort of between one
and five New Zealand, thousand New Zealand dollars,
between 100 and 200,000 here, Mexican cartels know
that we are a very attractive market as is Australia.
We have obviously, as the controller says, a taste
for methamphetamines.
That is why it's being pushed in our direction.
We are not alone, very cheap to manufacture
countries like Ecuador losing control to organize crime, uh,
losing control of ports.
Uh, and that is seeing these, these staging posts, these,
these locations become prominent sort of supply routes
through to New Zealand with cocaine and methamphetamine.
I I think it's also, I was saying that we are,
we are also a transshipment point.
And so the very large seizure of, uh,
cocaine operation hydros last year, 3.4 ton,
that was not destined for New Zealand.
They, it likely would've come here.
We, they might have taken a small slice off,
but that was destined for the Australian market.
And, and just the other thing I,
I think it's worth mentioning is
what you see in the United States and increasingly in Canada
and the uk, um, is the use of, uh, fentanyl
and that large, that that, um, suite of drugs if you like.
Thankfully we have not seen that here, that maybe yet
we don't seem to have quite the same taste for opioids
as North America can Canada, in UK we have,
which I'm relieved about,
but it's not to say it couldn't happen.
We are very vigilant about,
And, and I mean, I see you've done great work partnering,
not just domestically, but internationally.
How, how much of your work is really intercepting these
offshore shipments that were bound for New Zealand versus
what are you actually having in ports
or on arrival into New Zealand?
Well, you can sort of, you can see the relative size.
Um, and we, we are very fortunate
that our international colleagues, so particularly uh,
drug enforcement agency,
Homeland Security Investigations use Customs
and Border protection, uh, UK Border of Force,
national Crime Agency and others in
whole range of countries.
Um, they don't, they don't want to be seen
as an exporter of drugs to New Zealand.
And so they're very willing to work with us.
Uh, we have, um, staff in Los Angeles, London,
new Canberra, um,
and their work is, is very much looking at drugs action
through Asia and they work very closely with our colleagues.
So again, through Asia, uh, the Thai Office
of Narcotics Control board, the Japanese equivalent, um,
you know, we work with all of them in China.
The general administration of China.
Customers are actually very good to work with on drugs.
'cause again, they don't want to be seen
as an export to us. So,
But I, I guess this government has a
market solution to most things.
So I guess if you open the door slumped the price,
there'd be no, um, push to bring the drugs into this market.
Would that be the right French? Okay. Sorry,
I had a question in relation to the support
that you get from the New Zealand Defense Force,
and we had them in for annual review earlier this week.
Uh, we heard some of the challenges they've faced over
a few years now and to, in regards
to attrition in particular, which
for the Navy has seen a number
of the vessels effectively tied up, unable to sail.
And that obviously has an impact on the operational ability.
And so I'm interested not just from the Naval perspective,
but wider the Defense force, if you have seen any impact,
if they have in any instance, been unable to respond
to any of your requests. Okay,
That's true. I'll start
Jane. Jane probably have a view too.
Um, we have a very, very good relationship
with the Defense Force, most particularly the
Navy Air Force.
Um, we also, uh,
the National Maritime Coordination Center,
which is civilian coordination
of tasking requests into defenses, actually part
of customs for our sins.
Um, I've been trying to offload it to the Ministry
of Transport, but I don't think I'm, I'm not succeeding.
I don't, I don't think I'm going to.
Uh, but all joking aside, what that group does is, um,
if an agency like Customs and Police
or whatever need, um, defense assets, they go
through the National Marriage Coordination Center
and uh, we, we try to enforce a regime
where you ask for, you ask for the,
the sort of result you are looking for.
You don't get to say, I want a plane, I want to ship.
You say, well I need, I need to figure out if this thing
that's floating out in our EEZ it might be something
we could be concerned about.
Uh, and as far as possible,
defense Force tries extremely hard to meet those requests.
Um, I can talk a bit about a couple of things recently,
particularly, uh, you might have seen in the media
and operation in the far north of New Zealand, which, um,
we had, um, might Canterbury that Canterbury was
initially and then, uh,
Canterbury had to go off to do something else.
So, so PAs flying to try
to see what's going on out long way out.
So the Defense Force tries extremely hard to be supportive.
Um, but it is true they are shorter vessels
and nui felt like it painful for us
'cause that was the vessel that went out to get the cocaine
for the hydro with my office on board.
So, you know, that that was, that felt, that was hard. Um,
Sorry to clarify, I wasn't suggesting that short
of vessels rather the personnel
to operate the vessels. Well
It sort of amounts the same thing in the end, you know,
if they can't get the vessel
out 'cause they haven't got the crew.
So I tend to think of it in that way. Sorry.
So you're probably right. Um,
but they really do try very hard.
We've got some interesting things though that we are doing
with Navy in a smaller way.
So we are getting into UNC crewed
surface vessels and drones.
This is new,
but this is something we're doing in conjunction with Navy,
which I think is a good thing.
And so my own maritime group works extremely closely
with Navy, excuse me.
Uh, uh, we have use of their divers, which is very handy
'cause um, we do need people to go under boats, um,
to mention cs, excuse me.
And so using navy divers is a good thing to do that.
Uh, um,
but actually even in that area, we're starting to work
with the Navy and actually our Australian border force
colleagues on um, very cunning little basically engines
with cameras, which we can put right under ships.
And that's really a good thing to do
'cause it's, um, safer than sending a lives team down.
So it's a, it's a strong relationship, a good relationship.
So, sorry that, Jamie, are you aware of any situations
where defense have not been able to respond?
No. All our taskings would be met through, uh,
national Maritime Coordination Center.
Not always. Navy doesn't have to be Navy, you know,
other agencies have assets,
but, um, I think it would just reference
as the controller did a large operation recently,
we were given many PA flights,
two surface vessels over an extended period.
So everything we asked for was met.
So, um, uh, a very strong relationship
with the Defense Force,
I think would highlight for the committee though, that
if you're sending the rowa out to try
and search for one of those vessels,
then perhaps there are some
issues. It's not the ideal vessel
For, it's not, it's not built.
No, definitely not.
Very good. Dam. Um, just
Regarding the surveillance, have, have you been involved
with, uh, defense
or any other government agencies in, in the investigation
of, of drone, um, monitoring that is, you know, aircraft
that are capable of up to 40 hours, uh,
surveillance at one time,
and is that alongside Air Force capability?
So that's so thing we are starting to look at,
You are starting to look at, or have you had any
We haven't. We ourselves haven't
done anything yet.
In fact, we, I think we had a, there was a whole series
of demonstrations on the power just the last few weeks on
Yep. Some more coming.
See you. Yep.
But we, we haven't bought anything yet.
No, no, I wouldn't expect that.
But I, I guess in discussions in terms of the, um,
capability such,
We, we see it as very promising, but early days,
I was gonna just say, I think Defense Force look at some
of these capabilities and actually look across government as
to who, who else might be a customer.
So they're quite open with those conversations
and, you know, that gets engagement.
We go and see, and that's where we've gone
to the young crewed surface vessels with the, so,
And, and we're trying to do some different, um, sort
of acquisitions that they'll often, well the services,
they'll do the, um, procurement, but we will pay for half
and then we'll, we're going to run 'em together,
which is a bit experimental, but I think it'll work.
Can I just sub on there? Yeah.
Um, operationally
that you just mentioned something about customers,
but if you do use defense for any of your operations,
does any of that come outta your budget
or is that purely outta defense's budget.
Outta defense's budget.
Okay. Cool. And it was probably just a term,
but I just thought it would be good to clarify.
Um, often if we, if the defense deploy assets
for us, uh, we will often have our staff on board Mm-Hmm.
pH for a vessel. Yeah.
Because, uh, if, if something needs to be done
with say drugs, then it's our legislation. Mm-Hmm.
I guess, um, what I'm getting at is the defense budget
goes beyond just what they're doing.
Yes. They're complimenting a lot
of government agency work out of their own budget.
It's more of what I'm trying to get is,
And the Chief of Defense forces re
regularly reminds me of that.
Yes. I, I'm sure.
Absolutely. Very good.
You just interested in the, uh,
comments you made earlier about the eGate system Yes.
Expanded to more countries, presumably that leads
to an efficiency or processing
through Auckland in particular.
Yes. Which I'm sure would be most welcome.
Do you have any assessment of what sort
of efficiency gain that might provide there?
Not, not as large as you might think
because, uh, the,
the countries we've had have been the high, we, we started
with the, with the, uh, right.
So Zealands, Australians, Americans, uh,
also we are cautious about, um, we, we, we like the people
to use Seagates to be visa waiver countries,
get security reasons.
Uh, so we're down to sort of quite the countries from,
we get quite a small number of, uh, messages coming in.
So, you know, if you're looking at Sweden, you, the number
of Swedes come here that do cheer,
but the numbers model, but it look, it all helps.
Um, I guess we, we've been doing quite a lot
of modeling work on how quickly passengers can move
through the smart gates
and, uh, it, um, what
what we are finding is literally a few seconds
for Journal of Difference.
So even small increments are worth going after. Mm-Hmm.
We're in the market at the moment
for the next generation of Smart Gates.
One gates we've got have been really excellent,
but that coming toward the end of life, so just
working on that right now,
Um, we, we have the mighty Waikato.
Uh, we will be welcoming International flights are going
to Hamilton Airport mid next year, which is exciting update.
It is. As is Dunedin, obviously you'll be having a role
to play in terms of facilitating these,
We're very, very busy. It's
actually surprising amount of work to get
up to international standards.
I think they need to like
original airports funding that too.
Uh, but look, I think there's been excellent cooperation
and we've got after this and we can talk to that more.
But, um, what I would say is, uh, we,
we won't have Air Gates of Hamilton.
I just want to put that on record. Right.
The, the space available is really too tight.
Uh, and for one flight a day is the economics of having
that sort of technology that don't stack up.
So it'll be a bit, um, I've saying it's a bit like 1972.
You'll have a customs officer not quite
stamping a passport, but Mm-hmm.
Still do that travel declaration.
Absolutely. And in fact, we're gonna be pushing Jetstar
to say it has to be a hundred percent.
So.
Excellent. All right. Very good. Any further questions?
Wonderful. Alright. Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Uh, and just
before we finish, can we extend our thanks
to your wider team as well,
especially those at the operation front.
We are out there constantly being vigilant, trying
to protect our borders.
We very much appreciate that work.
Thank you Very much. Excellent.
Alright, we'll move straight on to Actually,
can we move straight on You Were, we're a little.